In the last lecture, I introduced futures and asynchronous code and I want to make really sure that
we all are on the same page regarding what this means and what async code really is. Asynchronous code
is code that runs and might take a bit longer and that shouldn't stop other code from continuing,
so the result of such asynchronous code will be available sometime in the future but not immediately and
here's an example.
If I have a variable, result and that's 1 + 1, then the result of this calculation of 1 + 1
is immediately available, when Dart parses this line,
it doesn't need to wait for this, it's immediately available.
Of course it needs to calculate this and all these calculations take some time but we're in the sub
millisecond area there and therefore, this is available immediately.
There are other operations, for example sending HTTP requests, which take a bit longer though. You
don't know how long, they take they might still be very fast but they might also take way longer and
therefore it would be bad if we wait for such a HTTP request result because the other
code would not continue executing in the meantime and your application would basically be frozen.
So instead for such operations, what Dart and many other programming languages as well do is they register
some function that you want to execute in the future once the response is there and then they continue
and they just keep that to be done, to be executed function in mind
and once your async operation finished, once that HTTP response is there for example,
they remembered that they had this function saved and they are then executed for you and Flutter handles
all of this with a class that's baked into Flutter,
the future class which has a fitting name if you consider that it's about handling results in the future.
You can also create your own futures, future has a constructor and to this constructor, you can pass a function
where you for example return hello.
Now let's store this in a my future variable and now this creates your own future and this is not the
function that will be executed in the future but instead, this will be executed right away by Dart when
it encounters this future that you create a future,
this is what it executes right away. In here, you could write your own code that takes a bit longer,
for example because you setting up a timer or you're writing your own HTTP library where you do all the
low level things of composing the request and sending it over the wire and passing incoming response
bytes, that's in the end what packages do for you behind the scenes,
you rarely create your own futures.
Here we are doing it though, so this is now executed immediately by Flutter, of course this is no code
that will take longer but still Flutter will go ahead with other code first and only once the other code, the
synchronous code has all been parsed,
it will basically check if that is done and of course, that will be done by then because it will also
finish immediately and then we can use my future then to register a function that should be executed
when this future is done.
Now again, this will be done immediately but Flutter does not stop all other code execution just because
this is done,
instead it will finish the current code execution goal and finish all the other synchronous code first
and then check if the future is done and yes, it will be done and then it will call the function you
pass to then.
So here, you might get your result and in our case, that will be a string
and here we can then print result. If we now hit run here, we see Hello.
Now the interesting thing is that if I add this runs first here and I add another statement here,
this also runs before the future is done,
if we add all of that and I hit run, then we see that these two statements indeed run before we see
Hello.
Now that's really important to understand what I just explained.
We create our own future here, this here, this function is executed right away by Dart, not in the future
but right away when it finds this line
but Dart expects that this function does something which takes a bit longer.
So of course, it will also execute this code but it will, simultaneously so to say, continue with the other
code.
Now of course, this is done immediately but Dart doesn't care, it continues with the other code. Here,
it sees that you're using the future and you're setting up a function that should be executed once that
code in the future is done.
Now Dart doesn't care that this is already done, it still continues with all the other code and only
once it's done with all the other synchronous code, it goes back to the future and checks
is this done
and yes it's done, so then it executes this function,
that is how you can think about that.
Of course technically behind the scenes, it's a bit more complex but in the end, that is how you can think
about this.
Now as I said, you rarely create your own futures like this,
often you have some packages like the HTTP package which have some methods that just return futures.
So in this case, you wouldn't see that part where the future gets created,
you would right away be at that part where you use then to register the function that should execute
once this future is done.
So that's the more common scenario of how you work with futures, you get finished futures and you just
start at this step here where you register a function that should be executed when the future is
done.
Now this function here as you see gets a result, the result of the future,
even if the future doesn't return anything.
So even if you have a future like this, you still would get an error
if you don't register a result or expect a result, so you should always expect the result here
even if you know that your future won't return one, then you just don't have one
but still, you need to accept one here and in addition, it's also worth noting that then also always returns
a new future. So you could add another then call after this and this then block is effectively called
on the result of this then block which is a future, so then always returns a new future which will be
done as soon as your code in the first then block is done.
So here, we would have another round of code execution.
So here we can simply execute another function after first then, which executes
after the first then block is done. So we could add this code snippet here and run this and now we see
dot dot dot,
that's the output of the first then block and then after first
then here and you can add many then blocks as you want,
you always get a new future returned automatically.
Now of course, you don't have to add one if you got no other code to run,
you can just ignore that future but there always is the opportunity for you to chain more then blocks
after each other,
so this concept is called chaining, that you call a method on the result of a previous method all in one
line
and that is simply a powerful feature which would allow you to do multiple different steps which possibly
all take a bit longer and then always use the result of the prior step in your next step.
Futures can also fail and we can also write this in a more readable way by the way to make it clear
that this belongs together but runs after each other. Now futures can by the way also return errors
and you can handle those with catch error.
Now you'll see that throughout the course, here you get the error that was thrown in the end and then here,
you can do whatever you need to do to handle that error, send it to your own analytics server, show
an error message to the user, whatever you need to do. It is worth pointing out that catch error also
returns a future, so you can call then after a catch error and then this then block here will execute
if we had this error here. Catch error will catch any errors thrown by the future or by any then block
in front of catch error, it will not catch errors thrown in then blocks after catch error and these are
the basics about futures and async code.
It's an important concept which you'll find in all major programming languages,
it's not always called future, in JavaScript for example it's called promise but the idea always is the
same. You have some code that might take longer,
so to not block execution, the programming language continues with the other code and your code that
depends on that longer taking operation is registered and executed once that operation is done.
Now we'll work a lot with futures throughout the course,
you'll also learn about a different syntax, then using all these then statements and therefore this will
become clearer and clearer over the course
but I hope the fundamentals are clear right now.